---
layout: post
title: "The Leprechauns of Software Engineering"
author: Laurent Bossavit
pages: 152
format: ebook
goodreads_id: 15874425
shelves: business, tech
finished: 2014-04-23
rating: 2
reviewed: true
---
## Review:
<div class="review">
This is a confusing, and ultimately quite frustrating book. The basic premise is good: the software development field is full of received wisdom that has mutated over time from simple reasonable hypotheses to being treated as established fact supported by research. But when you dig under the surface a little more, you discover that the research didn’t actually say what everyone thinks, but it’s been quoted enough times (often by people who should really know better) that everyone now assumes it <em>must</em> be true. So Bossavit sets out not only to debunk some of these, but (both by example, and by explicit [and somewhat patronising] training), to show you how to do likewise — or at least persuade you that you should become much more skeptical of such claims. <br /><br />This is an area I know something about, having spent some time a decade or so ago digging through the original research to support the “some programmers are an order of magnitude more efficient” claims. It’s hardly a spoiler to reveal that I, like Bossavit, <a href="http://dustyvolumes.com/archives/497" rel="nofollow">discovered</a> that the original studies everyone refers to (a) were about debugging, rather than creating the original code; (b) were explicitly measuring the difference between working at a computer vs working on paper, rather than comparing like with like; (c) had a mix of programmers who were new to the language being used with experts in it; and even then, (d) had significantly less variation in results than is usually claimed; and (e) showed that the best programmer on one task could just as easily be one of the worst on some other task — hardly a ringing endorsement for the ‘super-programmer’ mythology that arose as a result.<br /><br />Unpicking the threads behind myths like this can be both fun and instructive, and Bossavit does a pretty good job of it. But unfortunately the book didn’t really work for me. Partially this is because it seems still far from finished. It’s a LeanPub book, which means this is, to a certain extent, expected, and it’s explicitly noted at the start that it’s still a work in progress (and may indeed <em>never</em> be finished). Some chapters are barely more than a placeholder thought, still needing to be fleshed out, whereas others are disproportionately long (largely reflecting simply how much work was involved in debunking it, rather than how important or wrong it was); and there are lots of little presentational issues still needing cleaned up. The structural flow doesn’t quite work — there are too many “as we’ll see later” forward-references (and at least one spurious “as we’ve previously seen” back-reference), and the book still largely feels like a series of stand-alone articles that hasn’t yet been edited into a coherent whole.<br /><br />More troubling, however, is that Bossavit can’t quite decide which position to attack in many cases: the simple “research shows …” version, or the stronger underlying claim.  Even if the research doesn’t show that some programmers are twenty-eight times more productive, everyone still knows that <em>some</em> variation of this is true ... right? Well, er, maybe. As a throwaway at the end of the chapter on this metric, the book leaps, within a couple paragraphs, from discussing the claim, to raising the question of whether the the construct even has any validity, to outright asserting: <br /><blockquote>The 10x claim is “not even wrong”, and the question of “how variable is individual programmer productivity” should be dissolved rather than answered.</blockquote><br /><br />Similarly, when it comes to examining some of the research around bug-finding, the somewhat astonishing claim is made that:<br /><blockquote>while germs are very much in the “don’t go away if you stop believing in them” category, that’s much less true of these things we call “bugs”</blockquote><br /><br />Perhaps it <em>is</em> true that the entire concept of productivity of software developers is flawed, and that (outside Hopper’s moth) bugs as we think of them don’t really exist. But these are much stronger claims that go far beyond simply showing the flaws in some research, and their inclusion (with little explanation) is a little jarring. Saying “the research doesn’t say this, and even if it did it would be wrong, as the whole concept is erroneous” comes across a little too much like “My client has never even owned a gun. And even if he did, he certainly didn’t have it with him that night. And even if he did, he wasn’t the one who fired it in the bar. And anyway, he wasn’t even there.”<br />
</div>
