---
layout: post
title: "Radical Cities: Across Latin America in Search of a New Architecture"
author: Justin McGuirk
pages: 288
format: Hardcover
goodreads_id: 18490896
shelves: architecture, politics, save-the-world
finished: 2014-04-10
rating: 4
reviewed: true
---
## Review:
<div class="review">
Much gets written about the mass-urbanisation happening in China and Africa, but Latin America is often strangely overlooked, even though it went through almost identical patterns half a century ago, and in some countries has over 80% of the population living in cities. In the process it experimented with many different approaches, often swinging rapidly back-and-forth between housing as a basic human right for the government to provide, and the sometimes-ideological, sometimes-merely-pragmatic, ideal that people (by which, of course, we mean the poor), should build their own houses.<br /><br />In more recent times, cities such as Medellín in Colombia have been internationally recognised as places that have been completely transformed (in this case, from the murder capital of the world) largely through architecture, and the region is full of architecture-as-activism projects. <br /><br />And so McGuirk, previously editor of international architecture magazine, Icon, sets off on a tour of Latin America to find out how much the reality lives up to the hype.  (The short answer: It doesn't, but it's still impressive anyway.)<br /><br />The book takes an extended look at numerous approaches to city-building (in the loosest sense): from the very basic level of providing housing (PREVI in Perú, and the Quinta Monroy "build people half-a-house and let them build the rest" approach in Chilé); through the gentrification of the favelas in Rio and the effects of the city building out for the Olympics and the World Cup; the transformation of public spaces (such as Medellín's library parks); the crucial importance of transport infrastructure in cities where being poor can add two hours to how long it takes to get to work … or a hospital; what happens when 3000 people take over an abandoned 45-storey corporate skyscraper as a squat (with no elevators); or when mega-cities get big enough to span national boundaries; to Antanas Mockus’ attempts to transform Bogotá primarily through transforming the people themselves.<br /><br />These all make for fascinating stories, and the author does a good job of avoiding oversimplification — understanding, and reiterating constantly, that there are no easy answers to many of the questions that these projects are attempting to deal with (or themselves raise), and that it’s often unclear to what extent any of these can be successfully replicated elsewhere. <br /><br />The travelogue-interview style of writing can drag and grate at times (particularly when he goes full-blown architecture nerd, wandering Peruvian social housing projects playing spot-the-architect: “That’s clearly a Stirling, but is that a van Eyck or an Alexander?”), and the book presupposes a quite high level of understanding of architectural topics, assuming that the reader needs no further explanation for the continual references to Le Corbusier, Brutalism, etc. This makes the book a difficult read, particularly in the early chapters, which is particularly disappointing, as there’s no real reason why this should be so. The book will be interesting and useful to many non-architects, and providing a simpler entry-point to some of the concepts would have made it much more accessible. Thankfully I found the subject matter compelling enough to plough on through the most difficult parts. The areas I had known <em>something</em> about previously have had much too little written about them in English, so this is a very welcome addition, even with these flaws.<br /><br />I was also slightly surprised to find only a single passing remark to Porto Alegre’s now-widely-copied approach of Participatory Budgeting, and none at all to initiatives like Belo Horizonte’s "People’s Restaurants”, or São Paulo banning all public advertising as noise pollution. But there’s room for many books on all these topics — and hopefully there are indeed many more to come.<br /><br />
</div>
